[Music]
yes gracias
enri um so uh very thankful for the
opportunity to to talk today um I I I've
talked to Enrique a number of times and
I'm very grateful for the possibility of
sharing uh and raising awareness for
some of these issues which have been
particularly difficult to um to raise
awareness in regards to my country I'm a
Venezuelan uh clinical Community
psychologist ER I uh am now living in uh
Spain uh but continue to do research and
to teach at uh Venezuela online and uh
for for for a while I've been um uh
being able to uh have some inventory and
and register some of the psychiatric
abuse and the use of Psychiatry for
political repression in Venezuela and um
it's it's been quite hard to position uh
the the the issue even though some of
the actions are quite a public um and
and so again it's it's uh a great
possibility to be able to share with
others do that are doing Sim work in
other areas of of the world I'm going to
show some slides to be able to um share
my presentation uh just a second here
okay so you should be able to see my
slides uh now uh I just want to see if I
can see myself and the slides at the
same
time
[Music]
okay okay so so you should be seeing my
slides uh uh
now and
[Music]
um I I um want to start um showing a
little bit of the context of the uh
psychiatric situation in uh Venezuela uh
before uh going through some of the
specific cases of use of Psychiatry for
political uh repression um and and there
was a very particular experience last
year as I was uh teaching uh to the
course in uh one of the postgraduate uh
courses uh that uh seems very very um uh
ill illustrative uh very representative
of some of the things that are going on
and that's kind of where the name of the
presentation comes from it's not
metaphoric it's quite literal um I was
uh teaching one of the courses where we
uh discuss some of the psychiatric users
movements and and some of the story of
anti psychiatric move movements and the
development of uh psychiatric um um
models for attention and uh as I was
going through the the Twitter uh before
that class I came up with a a quite
astounding uh tweet that I found where
um uh some clinical resident mentioned
that uh as he was doing his uh uh
clinical practice in a public uh
Psychiatric Hospital uh he came one
morning and to find that the whole
hospital was filled with uh pigs with
pigs in the hospital and uh it was just
one more of a huge layer of uh uh
examples of the abandonment of the level
of Abandonment of the psychiatric
clinics and uh he took some pictures and
videos and and he tweeted them as I said
with uh anonymously um so here is I I
think you can see my second uh um
um the second slide please let me know
if if the second slide came up here is
uh some of the pictures that the student
uh shared and um as I say they were
quite surprising so I took them to class
next day kind of to show U that that
this was uh another example of the level
of um of deterioration of the system
okay perfect enrik um and um it to my
surprise at at the end of the class uh
um student asked to talk to me and I I I
said of course and uh we we talked
through WhatsApp and and she said that
she wanted to talk to me because the
person who had done those tweets was at
that class that day and uh was feeling
very scared and wanted to talk to me in
private but didn't know if it was uh it
was uh safe to do so so I was kind of
surprised by this whole Affair I I I I
haven't been in the Venezuela living for
5 years so so the level of of of fear in
him kind of surprised me but of course I
said yes and uh when he talked to me I
was able to understand a bit more he
said that uh his tweet had become viral
inside of the country and newspaper um
sources had picked up on the news and
and and well one of the pictures there
is from one of those uh uh portals and
uh that that uh um made an alarm go off
in the psychological School in our
University and some University uh um
figures uh had told him that it was uh
not right to have uh done that tweet and
that he should uh take it down because
he put uh the University's uh practice
at that hospital at risk and it might
not be ethical to be doing this and I
was kind of surprised by the whole thing
um because not only was it surprising to
see the what was going on in the
hospital it was also surprising to see
the University's reaction first of so
much fear and and second to be even um
uh suggesting to censor his uh his uh
critique his public critique but that
also led me to understand the level of
uh militarization and authoritative use
of uh the the public spaces in general
which I think is very relevant to all
things I want to share in this talk
today I'll I'll talk also around 30
minutes and and try to have some time to
to talk with any question and share any
questions and comments so um in the
context of what's going on in uh
psychiatry in in Venezuela has to do
with a collapse of the of the uh public
health system in general and uh
specifically in the public psychiatric
system uh which has uh has very very
Gravely deteriorated uh the government
does not uh um share uh its uh data on
uh Public Health since around
2011 um but uh we can have some sources
of how bad the situation has gotten from
different sources uh the the World
Health Organization cited the government
in 2011 showing the number of service
users of the public psychiatric system
and showed how that meant that there was
already a 42% reduction of the
availability of beds for chronic or or
or acute patients that needed to be
hospitalized and uh in 2015 a New York
Times report found uh figures uh to be
uh of
5,558 service users so if in 2011 uh
there was a 42% reduction having 37,000
patients we can see that by
2015 the the the lack of services
provided is is astoundingly uh low and
uh that is what we confirm through our
daily practice I mean uh uh with with
all the residents and all the doctors
that we know in the public health system
we know that there's a gross a lack of
medicines many times using medicines
that have already passed their date and
uh General conditions in many cases uh
there's not not even food in one of in
some of these public hospitals and in
one particular uh surprising uh account
by the students that were doing their
practice in one of these hospitals they
even told us that there weren't any
chairs they were doing their theoretical
and practical seminars of the University
sitting on the on the on the floor which
is uh surprising because uh the chairs
used to be at the hospital so it's not
they didn't have resources somebody
stole uh the chairs and and there were
any chairs anymore so we're talking
about a a a huge collapse of of what was
before uh a regularly working system not
the best system but uh uh reasonably uh
functioning to a very very deteriorated
situation and um reflected in in in
different uh ways in the suffering of
the people who are supposed to be
receiving help um in a newspaper report
uh uh uh that went through one of the uh
public hospitals of chronic patients uh
I I uh extracted this quote which I
think is very significant a patient
saying I'm not crazy I'm hungry and and
having many reports of patients uh who
were uh abandoned in these public
hospitals um not only feeling hunger
finally having patients die of hunger uh
and it's pretty incredible to imagine
patients dying of hunger while being
hospitalized in a public uh service so
so this uh um amount of of of of
scarcity
led to in
2019 The Unofficial shutdown of services
we know this because the directors of
services and the doctors that are
friends told us that they received the
information uh not not written but um
orally to uh not receive any more
patients and to try to gradually uh send
all the patients that were there back to
their homes and uh for for for a couple
of years there was practically no uh
access to public uh uh Psychiatric
Services in in in the
country uh the the lack of psychiatric
medicine is one part there's also a lack
of any type of medicines and we have
reports of patients that died because
they got an infection and they weren't
even antibiotics and that led to the
spreading of infection and the death of
the patient so um uh in in more official
um uh reports about uh the situation for
example wola which is the Washington
office of Latin America uh uh that did
uh an analysis of Venezuela's complex
humanitarian crisis uh uh clearly states
that the health system is in shambles
and I'd say the psychiatric system is
probably the worst off and uh we also
have um the possibility that News
newspaper reports have uh shown a bit of
what's going on and uh even
International sources uh the
international reports have shown uh a
bit of what's going on inside of
psychiatric hospitals uh Washington Post
New York Times ELP in in in Spain and
and we get a glimpse of the gravity of
the general uh situation uh two years
ago I was able to conduct um a research
project with one of the the news portals
that is uh independent researching in
Venezuela and um through through them we
were able to call uh uh the the list of
the mental health uh Services listed by
the uh Ministry of Health and uh and
call at different times day to see how
many were functioning and during three
months of calling these 264 centers we
were able to receive 4 thou
four% of answers only 4% of those
centers answered the call and 2% of them
um stated they that they were offering
attention so again another example of
the LI grave limitations of access to
services in in in Venezuela this uh is
in contrast
to A A A system that had been growing
that had been developing since the 50s
it had um maybe three four decades that
with difficulties had been able to to to
to grow and to even uh improve in regard
to uh awareness of patients human rights
of developing more modern approaches to
uh mental health uh for example one of
the public hospitals that was shut down
which is this picture here Hospital
Patric
Elon was a hospital that was opened in
1962 in the beginning of kind of the
mental health uh Revolution tion uh of
thinking of more Humane ways of offering
uh psychiatric treatment it was designed
with wide open spaces it had community
activities it it thought that uh helping
having uh very uh comfortable and active
participation of of the inpatients would
be good for the health and it was part
of the movement that happened in
Venezuela and in the world to uh strive
for brief hospitalizations only in the
acute moments of of of of a crisis and
um it it it helped uh to uh lead some of
these transformations in the psychiatric
system in in Venezuela as uh it became
part of a a movement for reform that was
very strong in the 80s that was fed from
many things that were happening in the
world and in 1980 in 1990 we we in kakas
the capital of of Venezuela we even
hosted one of the emblematic conferences
on the rethinking of psychiatric uh
practices and this conference for
restructuring psychiatric care in Latin
America led to what is known as the
Declaration of karacas where where many
uh countries of the World Health
Organization through their psychiatric
um departments agreed on on striving to
develop a more communitybased and more
um uh human rights aware uh types of
treatment for psychiatric patients so so
I'm I'm I'm mentioning this because this
is I think important to understand what
was gone on in Venezuela the last two
decades and how it contrasts to uh A
system that had its its faults many
faults but had been having some
interesting advances in in in mental
health uh care and uh in a 2018 article
by um uh an academic who has has thought
about uh What uh the development of the
the psychiatric system says about the
history of the whole country he
described it as a
demod that would happen in in in mental
health is described by him as Dem
modernization and he describes it as a
retreat to precient ific uh 19th century
Psychiatry as we see some of the
pictures that have been uh reported in
these uh International uh photographic
reports we see that the conditions of
some of these uh patients are are images
that uh lead us more to think about 19th
century Psychiatry than 20th century uh
Psychiatry and so so in is it it's in
this context of a system that has very
uh Gravely um um um uh
deteriorated that um the the the the the
persecution of political dissidents
through Psychiatry has happened so we
have so I'm presenting kind of two
dramas uh that are related one is a
drama of uh the the whole uh system for
for mental health care and what it has
uh implied for those living with with
any type of psychiatric difficulty to a
more uh per perverse uh use of
Psychiatry to persecute now political uh
dis dissidence uh and uh I'm going to
share uh a couple of of examples uh in
this regard uh the most emblematic case
uh that has happened in in Venezuela is
referred to Franklin bito which was in
the country a quite uh uh present figure
uh at at one point uh and um who uh uh
um political persecution Gravely used
Psychiatry as the weapon to uh try to uh
uh quiet him um so I'm going to say a
couple of things about the case and and
and Lead that to what what that um
pertains to psychiatric institutions
Franklin bro was a school teacher he was
a high school teacher also with a
biology and and and an aroner and he uh
in his life what he was dedicated to was
teaching in the high school of his town
but he also harvested um uh the the his
his um fields and uh he being an
intelligent man uh developed the strain
of um it's a a root that is eaten in in
Venezuela that he harvested without the
use of fertilizers so he found uh a way
of harvesting uh this uh particular um
Harvest without fertilizers and that
seemed to be a good thing and he wrote
to the local institution that helped
fund um much of what was doing what the
agronomos were doing at the time and uh
show that uh this could be harvested
without a fertilizers and uh at at at
that point it was uh well-received
and that led to uh funding uh his um
idea and to stop uh funding the
fertilizers used for that uh particular
harvest in his area and uh the the the
dark side of this was that the local
mayor was the one who handled uh the the
business of the
fertilizers uh so um he started to um
try to um acquire and to silence
Franklin Brito and he did this by two
things Franklin Brito was fired from his
post as a high school teacher and his uh
lands were taken from him and uh they
were assigned to another Local Peasant
and the the the argument was uh used the
argument used was that it was part of
The Agrarian reform that was going on in
this beginning of uh chavismo as a more
social um um uh looking for equality
government but the fact was that The
Agrarian re was meant to give lands that
were not being cultivated that were uh
abandoned that were not in use and in in
fact uh Franklin brito's land was in use
and it was just using that tool to uh
persecute him for having uh um
uh obst made an obstacle to this mayor's
uh um business so uh Franklin Britto
began began a series of protests uh to
recover his land he he went to uh the
different tribunals to the different
courts to to make protest uh many of the
courts uh told him that he was probably
right in what he was doing but uh they
weren't going to um go against a
political figure so he decided to start
a number of hunger strikes and that
that's when uh Franklin Britto becomes a
national figure and starts to news
reports start to um notice him and he
does a number of hunger strikes uh that
uh begin to um give him some political
Capital to challenge some of these
abusive practice that these uh local uh
governments and National governments
having with for example appropriation of
land and um he starts to be a prominent
figure and starts to become
uncomfortable for for national
government uh that tries to bribe him
that tries to give him money so he stops
his protest but they never accept giving
officially giving him back his land they
say we can give it back to you but we
can't sign any papers we can't
officially say we've made mistakes and
Franklin Franklin Brito very stubbornly
said that he was only going to accept a
legal resolution of his case so that
that took around seven years leading up
to the final hunger strike that he uh uh
began in 2010 in front of the
organization of American states which is
uh International American um
governmental um um organization and he
had a very public hunger strike in front
of those offices and again was gaining a
lot of uh visibility and at that moment
what the government decided was to
arrest him and hospitalize him uh
alleging that he was a psychiatric
patient so in 2010 at the beginning of
2010 he is taken to the military
hospital and he is um uh um given a
psychiatric uh label and uh asked they
asked the psy Psychiatry service to
evaluate him the Psychiatry service at
that public Hospital uh evaluates him
and comes to a conclusion that he does
not have any psychiatric symptoms but
the court orders him to be hospitalized
anyways and so he ended up being
hospitalized in the oftalmology service
because Psychiatry wouldn't take him uh
but he was still taken in by the
hospital and uh we began a Ser series of
protests to try to make visible the use
of psychi
here to persecute Franklin Brito and I
remember when we talked to the doctors
at the hospital they were very scared
they they they mentioned that uh they
they they strongly believe that he did
not have any psychiatric illness and
that they were not um uh agreeing with
what they were being forced to do but
they weren't uh going to protest uh
publicly they were going to say that
publicly they were only going to say it
privately they were going to sign any
report saying that he was Ill uh even if
even though they were being uh um kind
of pressured to do so but weren't uh uh
going to do any public denouncement of
the situation because they feared for
their their jobs and and and and worse
for for possibly being also at risk and
and so Franklin brto spent nine months
in uh the public um in the public
Hospital uh he was force fed at the
beginning he uh he um uh uh complained
that he was being held in prison uh as
um as a patient here are some of the
extracts the from some of the interviews
that he gave at that moment he said for
example I'm being held prisoner I have
three no two national guards at my door
I am okay but stuck here they say I'm
sick I'm sick since they weren't able to
make up any crime they made up that I
had to get well before I am free to
leave I will take this to the end for my
family and my day dignity so um in this
uh terrible uh situation they they
evaluated him nine times the first evalu
eight evaluations came to the same
conclusion that he did not have any
psychiatric symptoms and only the ninth
evaluation said that he was uh
psychiatrically ill it was done by a a
hospital director of another outside
Hospital of a man who is clearly
identified with uh the government and um
is very vocal in his uh advocacy for the
government and uh this man was the only
one that uh uh concluded that uh
Franklin Brito had any psychiatric uh
illness and that led to the attorney
general and to a national Senator saying
that brankin Brito was crazy and that
the all all that had happened were only
the the reactions of a mad man and he
was very publicly um assaulted in in in
in in public declarations by government
officials uh as as Franklin Brito saw
that there was no uh end to this
situation he continued hunger strike and
finally
died uh after the nine months in the
hospital which is again appalling that
uh uh someone who's supposedly been
taken care of because uh he's taken to a
public Hospital dies while being at a
public Hospital hospital and and I I
think this case is very significant uh
for us not only because it's a clear use
of Psychiatry to politically persecute a
person but also the difficulties for for
the for the organizations of
psychiatrist psychologist to publicly
denounce and to resist what was going on
there was a lot of efforts to resist but
not publicly and I think this is very uh
symptomatic of the fear of an
authoritarian uh situation that is is
going on it has to do with some of the
other things that I'm going to mention
uh but this is not the only uh way
there's been a use of Psychiatry to
persecute uh there's also been the
invention of Psych psychiatric labels in
uh Venezuela so um an ex um uh minister
of Public Health in Venezuela Eric
Rodriguez he came up he coined a term
that he calls psychotic dissociation and
he wrote uh a manual a book that he says
to describe what he says is this
condition that he um uh discovered or
invented as you prefer uh and they
published this book by the ministry of
communications the the the cartoon at
the at the front of the book is pretty
telling of what he believes this
psychiatric label to be uh as he thinks
that it is a c certain demonic qualities
of television and of uh social media
that gets into the heads of specifically
the middle class so he says this is a
disorder suffered by the middle class
and it is a disorder of psychological
manipulation done by television this is
particularly um argument used uh in
before the 2010 where the government
still did not have control of most uh
television channels that is not the case
now so at that moment the opposition to
government was many times explained as a
sort of uh psychotic dissociation
created by uh man manipulation and his
his book is quite uh Curious to read
it's a very pseudo scientific jargon
where he talks about a mix of of things
he is not a psychiatrist and uses
Loosely U many of the labels but
basically he's trying to say this that
opposition to the government is
craziness and and we need to deal with
people who are going crazy saying that
the revolution is abusive for example
let me cite one of his par paragraphs he
writes we try to understand this
Collective Behavior defined as psychotic
dissociation because of the presence of
some components of this
psychopathological Trilogy dissociation
psychosis and disturb disturbances of
behavior based on the definition of this
Collective Behavior we proceeded to
observe and analyze what the fundamental
trigger that was affecting an important
sector of Venezuelans of the middle
class and so this is kind of a pseudo
scientific jargon but it begin to
circulate and be constantly used as
explanations and ways to disregards any
arguments of the opposition and any uh
for example challenges to Human Rights
abuses that were being um uh uh used to
to challenge uh government and here here
is just a few examples as it began to
circulate the the label in in different
um uh Publications particularly worrying
is the the one on the leftand side which
is a publication from the Journal of uh
the University of the Andes where
someone very uh lightly uh uh uh writes
a public uh opinion article and uses the
term to explain politically what is
going on but we have a constant uh
example and I found one even as as as as
as recent as 2021 where the term was
continually continue to to you to be
used and um we've we've had different uh
versions of this of of the use of
psychological terms and psychiatric
terms to to to defend uh uh and use this
propaganda by by the government uh
constantly before uh the
international uh uh Community finally
identified Venezuela as a complex
humanitarian crisis uh many uh
government uh figures said it was just
psychological warfare being held against
Venezuela to um undermine its marvelous
uh achievements uh of the Revolution so
constantly psycholog
psychologizing and using psychological
terms to explain away criticism uh in um
2017 an international Forum was held in
the ministry of interior uh where they
invited uh what they called experts on
psychological warfare and there was a a
meeting of experts and of uh government
officials uh when that was being uh
promoted that event I knew of one of
psychologists who was in that team uh
that was organizing that and I I I told
him I am very keen to see the proof that
you have the evidence that you have that
uh the students that are on the streets
protesting it was a year of huge massive
student protest on the streets I'm very
keen to see what proof you have that
these students that are protesting on
the streets are manipulated
psychologically and are not uh
authentically uh in opposition to
government and um he he confessed that
that he didn't have any proof uh he just
had arguments of of what he thought was
manipulation so I asked him if I could
uh um assist the Forum because it was
such an important event that was talking
about the explanation of was going on
the process I wanted to hear the
arguments and see what was going on and
he said that of course I would be uh
offered an invitation but finally it was
a closed event and no one uh except
those related were allowed to to enter
at the end of this event for example
Nicolas Maduro the actual president of
the present president of Venezuela
suggested that they needed to develop
peace Laboratories to be able to offer
psychiatric treatment to recuperate to
recover uh young uh student protesters
who were really just mad and and and
were having psychiatric difficulties and
that's why they needed uh psychiatric
care so once again you see in different
moments uh these arguments of
psychiatric situations explain away um
uh uh political uh dissidence is is
repeated uh um one of the main uh
political figures right now the
president of the National Assembly is a
psychiatrist and he had a television
program an online television program
called Politics on the couch and he
constantly used psychiatric terms to
explain away any any political
oppositions I have this quote there
there are many from him for example
psychosis is the opposition's
disturbance constantly using uh um
psychiatric terms to discredit any
opposition um another related case I'll
just mention very briefly is because it
it gets quite bizarre as one gets into
it uh um Ugo Chavez had a renowned
psychiatrist who publicly said he was uh
Chavez's psychiatrist and and Chavez's
uh uh admitted that that was that was so
finally uh was found uh to have murdered
a patient and and and when they found uh
uh the body and started to investigate
in his cult Consulting room he was found
to have uh 1,200 uh uh pictures of naked
women in his Consulting room he was a
serial rapist and he had been able to do
this uh because he was linked to power
and he was a quite a a public political
psychiatric figure who was able to
conduct a very perverse uh a terrible uh
practice during years because of his
links to power so we're talking about
here different uh versions of Psychiatry
interlinking with the power system I I I
I imagine from the outside it's hard to
understand uh such an intricate uh uh uh
examples of of of
of Psychiatry and Power in Venezuela but
in the end what I'm trying to point out
is uh that there has been systematic
abuse of psychiatric language of
psychiatric um infrastructure of some
psychiatrist to uh discredit opposition
and sometimes to persecute uh opposition
and this has been very difficult to
render visible in the midst of the
economic crisis in the midst of the
political uh debates around Venezuela
the human rights of psychiatric patients
has been uh very much um um not attended
to and the use of Psychiatry for
political reasons have something that
even those professional um uh
organizations have tended to try to not
uh confront it's uh difficult to to put
on the table to to offer debate and uh
has been uh complicated to to raise
awareness so let me try to close uh with
a couple of comments my
presentation um let me mention just a
couple of things about the reasons uh
that for the collapse and that I think
that brings some arguments that are in
interesting to debate upon about uh
Psychiatry and political abuse um of
course it's well very obvious uh
explanation is uh that we' gone through
a huge economic crisis that has had
Venezuela in in the the the the the
highest hyperinflation for a country in
history of Latin America uh a couple of
years back up to a couple of years back
a very complex political crisis that's
led to a terrible crisis of
infrastructure well that's a very
general uh explanation but more
specifically I want to mention one thing
and leave that up to debate if we have a
few minutes to to to talk
um I think it this uh relationship of
Psychiatry and political abuse and
listening to David Matas in the previous
presentation has a lot to do with uh how
uh care interacts with
authoritarianism and how in an
authoritarian context it is quite hard
to develop strong caring
institutions uh and that leads to a work
by the Anthropologist paa Vasquez who
talked about in Venezuela what we have
seen is what she calls compassionate
militarism so it was a a military uh um
program from the start Ugo Chavis was
obviously uh an military uh man and it
was uh supposedly ideologically guided
to take care of the most vulnerable but
from the start it was uh completely
directed by a military standpoint and
she analyzes interactions between um um
social uh uh institutions for of care
and the military Logics that begin to
contaminate them for example in a
natural uh disaster that happened in in
Venezuela in 1999 so uh at the very
beginning of chismo she's able to
illustrate very clearly how when someone
was trying to technically resolve the
situation of natural disaster uh uh
instructions from above uh made it
impossible to do the technical uh
abilities and and procedures that were
were supposed to do any critique was
awarded off and was silenced because
there was not allowance for anything
that was interpreted as betrayal and
that began to um deteriorate any uh
political any public system programs to
take care of of the most vulnerable and
uh in that sense there's a very
interesting book by psychologist Norman
Dixon who worked in um the British um
military who who talks about the
psychology of military incompetence that
that that develops a lot of ideas of
what paa Vasquez uh described in
Venezuela is how a military standpoint
is not uh uh compatible with the
standpoint you need to be able to run a
a a um a hospital and that leads to the
pigs at the beginning of of my talk I
mean why were pigs there because there
were some milicianos which is a like
unofficial military Volunteers in
Venezuela who didn't have a place to
sleep and since the hospital was rather
abandoned uh they gave a space in the
hospital to these milicianos these
milicianos raised pigs so the pigs came
along with them and because uh there was
not many patients they let the pigs roam
through the hospital but when someone
critiqued the situation and uh made it
viral there was a scandal and everybody
got scared so so so this students uh
protest that was a logical protest of a
situation that kind of
escapes any any reasonable thinking of
what care should be was thought that it
was a an inconvenience that it was wrong
for him to voice his protest of pigs
being in the hospital because of this
military logic is what I'm getting to
and uh well government has been quite um
quite uh uh insistent in persecuting
doctors from the start uh this is from
this this this this year uh an Amnesty
International report what that shows how
uh government persecution against health
workers has been massive and and we have
reports leading back to 2004 almost 20
years back when the minister of uh
Health uh threatened doctors that uh
tried to sign a petition against the the
president at that time uch Chavez as
that was going to be interpreted as an
act of terrorism so so we can see here
clearly what Paula Vasquez was saying
this interference of military logic in
the organization of care which
completely destroyed the possibility to
care for the most vulnerable we have to
think is is democracy
uh a uh a health variable do we need
Democratic spaces to be able to develop
modern uh public uh Health well I think
that's a question to leave open and I'm
going to stop here so thank you very
much for the your your your time and
you're listening and if there's anything
we can you want to talk about I'd be
glad to talk
about
any
questions uh I was thinking what you
said at the end through the talk like
psychology requires freedom of speech to
be able to operate otherwise it's the
build up to the second world all over
again in Germany people could not speak
to the therapist because they were
required to talk and report back as what
he is telling you ET there is no option
whatsoever to do any kind of talk
therapy or anything so psychology is
really at the interface of Both Worlds
and it's really interesting what what
you're sharing yeah yeah yeah
sure yeah I I I think it brings up a
good question I mean we maybe we haven't
talked so much about that in in in
psychological literature I mean how much
something like
Psychotherapy is can only be thought of
in uh in in a moment of history and a
place where freedom of speech is
considered uh uh an important uh value
uh I mean is it possible to develop
Psychotherapy where there is no freedom
of speech and and the cases that you
mentioned uh uh where authoritarian
governments have been um in place that
start to complicate Psychotherapy and
there starts to be an anxiety around
being able to speak whatever comes to
mind because uh it it can be politically
uh persecuted for example we have
reports of that in Argentina during the
military dictatorships but also in
Hungary and and in the Eastern uh
European countries during the Soviet
block there's interesting reports of of
that so so yeah yeah I mean I I do think
freedom of speech is a is a uh
indispensable value uh if we are going
to think of psychological attention uh
through
Psychotherapy we have another expertise
of how to revert back from one system
that is militaristic and logic requires
a space go and anything is Justified
against that Collective or collectives
that may just be pointing that there is
some mistake and they have the article
there is no mistake we are saying what
to do and nobody could say anything else
there is enough literature
to
help Venezuela go back to a system that
can support each other and please there
is no need to fight against what what is
really the enemy here yeah yeah sure
sure yeah at the same time it's um in in
Venezuela it's been complex uh because
uh uh many of the activists and the
sources of resistance against human
rights abuse are um are left uh uh
leaning uh politics and uh I I would
identify with that a progressive thought
that leads to trying to attend to
inequality and to vulnerability I think
is uh is uh a very important uh strength
but at the same time Venezuela has been
able to cover its authoritarianism with
a leftwing jargon and and that's uh
that's given them a space to uh be able
to do many of these human rights abuses
without many of these activists and
organizations that tend to point the
finger to Human Rights abuses kind of be
very tentative um listening to what's
going on in Venezuela and it's been very
hard in psychological and psychiatric
circles to to raise awareness to what
has gone on in Venezuela because the
many of these organizations tend to be
very tentative in in looking at
Venezuela as a human rights abuser and
not as a a banner for for left-wing
politics uh so that that that's
particular in in its own um sense and
and the other thing that comes up while
you you were mentioning but while you
were saying what you were saying is that
uh it's it's really incredible to see it
at work in your University I mean in a
place where I I I studied and where I
know many of the people who who who who
have academic uh history mines and and
who one knows to be uh linked to
Progressive thought and to the thought
of freedom of speech and to think that
it's very important to have uh Freedom
then inside of University start to react
because they're scared and start to have
reactions to censor a student that's
kind of surprising uh to see and and one
can see how authoritarian logic begins
to take up
space
yeah and that links us to the next
speaker that I'm waiting for her to to
connect she is now in the United
Kingdom she's from Republic of China and
this is what David shared that there is
legitimate concern despite hering there
because
this there is no stopping just one
person it is but maybe psychiatrist not
doing this looking at beyond the
individual they are I mean like these
regimes have no stop in just one person
they will go against the closed and this
is something that maybe psychologist
much more advanced and psychiatrist say
we need to look at the whole network and
the family the any sure sure sure
absolutely I I I completely agree
completely agree with you I I think
she's connected now if if I'm not
wrong yeah that's
correct welcome
Jesse
em Manuel do you want to wrap it that or
yeah well no thank thank you again thank
you again Enrique I mean it's it's a a
interesting to be able to listen to
other experiences in in other areas I
mean it was as I I told David it was
painful to listen to the the the
atrocity and the and the and the massive
numbers of of abuse that he reported in
in in China
uh uh China seems uh perplexing in many
ways and seems to be uh for us uh allows
us to think of Venezuela from a
different uh uh Viewpoint it's uh they
they have some uh parallel Logics and
some very different at the same time uh
context to to to kind of mirror and
think about uh different ways of of very
authoritarian uh abuse yeah so so thank
you again for inviting me and to be able
to listen to all the other
speakers thank you well I'm I'm going to
share one anecdote that I
have uh and I I feel that as researcher
I
can at least not be put into question
that I am saying what I saw may she have
not been truthful you will see that I
old lady in the street in Barcelona next
to the hospital that asked me for money
because postoperatory she is is left
without means to live that is the
psychiatric logic of a diagnosis it's a
beggar but it's not it's the
psychologically speaking now you come
with a formulation of the case what she
said it is our old lady that is outside
the hospital afterwards she could not
and we need this kind of thing that from
health system help prevent the massive
downold to a situation like now in
Venezuela nobody has to at least the
ones in the hospital to it so there is a
responsibility of course there is fear
to talk but from Health disciplines and
anybody else around needs to coordinate
and help the support system Society to
stay a flat it's really something that
we should be aware she's not a beggar
situations here are not about the enemy
or not it is we need to find a solution
yeah how how to attend to the system and
not just uh it's its consequences yeah
absolutely absolutely yeah yeah
absolutely Jesse if you wish to to start
we can go ahead otherwise I will just
say that imagine if in Barcelona we can
go ahead and ask and
see trying to Del into China as hard as
it is a host of David got bullets in the
only because it really it makes people
think I hope that it makes people
think yeah yeah uh David's David's
presentation is quite quite um quite
astounding yeah
sure
psychologically the the break from
reality that having exposed to this many
people doesn't
know yeah something
that yeah it's it's quite it's quite
astounding yeah even if uh i' I've read
a lot of the psychiatric abuse of China
it's it's been a source for thinking
about uh Venezuela it's hard to listen
to I mean I was listening to him and uh
I I I felt at at at I mean during his
presentation for moments it is is uh
quite uncomfortable quite disturbing to
listen to so so I guess that's part of
the challenge of talking about these
things they uh listening to atrocity is
quite
hard
yeah I I want to make the most to
apologize that we are only six persons I
did my best to promote this event I will
publish edit Etc to at least spread the
word and and make the most of it short
clips maybe anyhow I I think it's part
of the same same thing we're talking
about I mean a first uh the rights of
mental health has been a difficult uh uh
issue to put on the table it's been a
struggle to to humanize and and and and
be able to to Really register awareness
for for for the rights of of of of
psychiatric patients it that by itself
has been a challenge and if you add the
political use of Psychiatry it becomes a
double uh uh a a double difficulty and
uh having to listen to things that we
would prefer to think that are
impossible that we would prefer to think
that are uh unimaginable to be happening
is I think it's quite a challenge so so
I I um I appreciate your insistence and
I think we need to insist on on showing
some of these realities and and to to
network and to to find strength in in
the networks of people who are aware of
what's what is going on so yeah again I
think it is a a useful effort and and
and it's great that you're recording and
and we can continue to share these
ideas yeah most
definitely uh let's take a break two
minutes and then continue with Jesse
fantastic